There is perhaps no other human impact that is as far-reaching and destructive on wildlife as transportation infrastructure. Vehicular collisions have now surpassed hunting as the leading direct human cause of vertebrate mortality on land. While the number of common species killed along roads is staggering, the population effects can be devastating for small and declining populations. In response, many local, state, and federal agencies are implementing mitigating structures into highway design to reduce the occurrence of wildlife-vehicle collisions. Past studies have found that roadkill locations along roadways act as reliable indicators of wildlife crossing areas.

Research that involved completing roadkill surveys along a 19 km stretch of HWY 64 running through the northern portion of Alligator River National Wildlife Refuge in Dare County, North Carolina was conducted by a member of the Center. Road killed animals were collected and identified by walking along both sides of the highway every 7 – 10 days during summer months (April – August) and every 14 days in all other months (September – March) from March 2009 to March 2011. Every vertebrate animal mortality was identified to a precise taxonomic level. UTM coordinates, date, sex, age, and location on the roadway (e.g. road or shoulder) were also recorded. All road kills were either removed from the search area or marked with paint to avoid double counts in subsequent surveys. Additionally, data on medium and large-sized mammal road kills were opportunistically collected. Using the data collected along HWY 64, hotspot analysis was used to determine areas of interest for the mitigating structures. The hotspot analysis executed for Birds, Amphibians, Reptiles, and Mammals determined the lack of cold spots — meaning that there is not a single area that would assist the roadkill issue with one mitigation structure. The most successful mitigation method is to raise the 19 km of HWY 64 to be a bridge over the Alligator River National Wildlife Refuge. 

Humans are part of the environment and they greatly affect any ecosystem, which needs to be considered while executing research and determining solutions. This project allowed analysis on a large dataset, background research on infrastructure, and research on mitigation techniques which covers many possible career paths for HU graduates.
